=title Table Record (table)

The C<table> record holds a column-oriented table: a set of named columns, each
an array of up to C<MAXROWS> elements of a per-column data type. It is intended
to be served over PV Access as a pvData C<NTTable>; the bundled C<<< QSRV2 >>>
(pvxs) integration publishes the record's columns, labels and timestamp as the
structured fields of an C<NTTable>.

Rather than a single value field, the record exposes each column as a I<bundle>
of fixed-name fields, in the same spirit as the aSub record's A..U inputs. A
column C<I<nn>> (hex C<00>..C<0F>) is described by C<CI<nn>NAME>, C<CI<nn>LABEL>,
C<CI<nn>TYPE> and C<CI<nn>INP>, with its data held in C<CI<nn>VAL> and its
runtime status in C<CI<nn>CHGD> and C<CI<nn>NROWS>. Up to 16 such I<data>
columns may be configured.

A second family of up to 16 I<optional> columns (C<COI<nn>...>) is provided for
per-column metadata: each optional column carries exactly one value per data
column (so it is sized to C<NUMCOLS> rows, not C<MAXROWS>) and is published
alongside the table, typically as a column attribute.

Columns are configured statically in the database (or filled in by device
support) and validated once, when the record initializes; thereafter the column
layout is fixed and only the column I<data> changes as the record processes.

=recordtype table

=cut

recordtype(table) {

=head2 Parameter Fields

The record-specific fields are described below, grouped by function. The 16 data
columns share an identical set of per-column fields, named with the column index
C<00>..C<0F> embedded in the field name (for example C<C00NAME>, C<C01NAME>, ...,
C<C0FNAME>); only the column C<00> fields are tabulated here, the rest follow the
same pattern. The 16 optional columns are named C<CO00...>..C<CO0F...> in the
same way.

=head3 Scan Parameters

The table record has the standard fields for specifying under what circumstances
it will be processed. These fields are listed in
L<Scan Fields|dbCommonRecord/Scan Fields>.

=head3 Table Configuration

C<INP> is an optional input link for the record as a whole. Device support may
use it (for example, the simulation and CSV device supports read their table
description or contents through C<INP>); the C<<< Soft Channel >>> support
ignores it and instead reads each column's own C<CI<nn>INP> link.

C<MAXROWS> is the row capacity allocated for every data column. It must be set
before initialization (it is read-only afterwards); if left at zero,
C<init_record> forces it to 1. Each data column's value buffer is allocated to
hold C<MAXROWS> elements.

C<NUMCOLS> and C<NUMOPTCOLS> report how many data and optional columns are
active. They are B<not> set by the user: C<init_record> computes them by counting
the configured (non-empty) column names, and they are read-only
(C<<< SPC_NOMOD >>>).

=fields INP, MAXROWS, NUMCOLS, NUMOPTCOLS

=head3 Data Columns (C00 .. C0F)

Each data column is configured by four fields and exposes three more at runtime:

=over

=item *

C<CI<nn>NAME> — the column name. A column is "present" if its name is non-empty.
Names must match C<< [A-Za-z_][A-Za-z0-9_]* >>, must be unique across data
columns, and must be contiguous (no gaps): column C<I<nn>> may only be named if
all lower-numbered columns are also named. These rules are checked by
C<init_record>, which rejects the record (logging an error) if any is violated.
The name is fixed after initialization (C<<< SPC_NOMOD >>>) and becomes the
field label of the corresponding C<NTTable> column.

=item *

C<CI<nn>LABEL> — an optional human-readable column label carried alongside the
name. If empty, consumers typically fall back to the name.

=item *

C<CI<nn>TYPE> — the column's element type, chosen from the C<menuFtype> menu
(C<STRING>, C<CHAR>, C<SHORT>, C<LONG>, C<DOUBLE>, ...). Defaults to C<DOUBLE>.
It is read-only after initialization, since the value buffer is allocated for
this type. C<STRING> columns are stored using a variable-length string encoding
(see C<tableVStr.h>) so cells may exceed the usual 40-byte limit.

=item *

C<CI<nn>INP> — an optional per-column input link. The C<<< Soft Channel >>>
device support reads the column's data from this link (a constant array, a
database link, or a channel-access link).

=item *

C<CI<nn>VAL> — the column data buffer, an array of C<MAXROWS> elements of type
C<CI<nn>TYPE>. It is process-passive (C<pp(TRUE)>): a C<dbPutField> to it triggers
processing. Reading or writing it through Channel Access / dbAccess uses the
column's element type and reports C<CI<nn>NROWS> elements as the current length.

=item *

C<CI<nn>NROWS> — the number of valid rows currently in the column (0..MAXROWS),
maintained by device support / array puts. Read-only.

=item *

C<CI<nn>CHGD> — a "changed this cycle" flag. It is cleared at the start of
C<process> and set when the column's data is updated, so a publisher can send
only the columns that actually changed.

=back

=fields C00NAME, C00LABEL, C00TYPE, C00INP, C00VAL, C00NROWS, C00CHGD

=head3 Optional Columns (CO00 .. CO0F)

Optional columns hold one value per data column rather than C<MAXROWS> rows; an
optional column's buffer is therefore sized to C<NUMCOLS> elements. They are
intended for per-column metadata (for example a units or description attribute
for each data column) that is published together with the table.

They follow the same bundle pattern and the same validation rules as data
columns, with one addition: an optional column name may contain a single dotted
component, C<< prefix.field >> (matching
C<< [A-Za-z_][A-Za-z0-9_]*(\.[A-Za-z_][A-Za-z0-9_]*)? >>), which lets a consumer
map the optional column onto a nested attribute. C<COI<nn>NAME> and
C<COI<nn>TYPE> are fixed after initialization; C<COI<nn>VAL>, C<COI<nn>NROWS> and
C<COI<nn>CHGD> behave as for data columns.

=fields CO00NAME, CO00TYPE, CO00INP, CO00VAL, CO00NROWS, CO00CHGD

=head2 Record Support

=head3 Record Support Routines

=head4 init_record

Called twice (pass 0 then pass 1). On pass 0 it:

=over

=item 1.

Verifies that device support is attached: the DSET must be present, and must
declare at least 5 routines with a non-NULL C<read_table>. If not, an error is
logged and initialization fails.

=item 2.

Forces C<MAXROWS> to 1 if it was left at 0.

=item 3.

Calls the device support's C<init_record> (if any) so it can allocate memory and
fill in column names/types. If that routine returns C<<< TABLEREC_DEVINIT_PASS1 >>>
the record arranges to call it again in pass 1.

=item 4.

Validates the data column names (format, uniqueness, no gaps as described above)
and sets C<NUMCOLS> to the number found. The optional column names are validated
the same way and C<NUMOPTCOLS> is set.

=item 5.

Allocates any column value buffers not already provided by device support:
C<MAXROWS> elements for each data column, C<NUMCOLS> elements for each optional
column.

=back

On pass 1, if device support requested it, the device C<init_record> is called
once more (now able to read links and other records).

=head4 process

See L</Record Processing> below.

=head4 special

C<CI<nn>VAL> and C<COI<nn>VAL> accept array puts via C<special>. Before the data
lands (C<after=0>), a C<STRING> column's previous variable-length cells are
released; after the put (C<after=1>), the column's C<CHGD> flag is set. Puts to
inactive columns are rejected. The column C<NAME> and C<TYPE> fields are
read-only at run time (C<<< SPC_NOMOD >>>) and cannot be changed once the record
has initialized.

=head4 cvt_dbaddr, get_array_info, put_array_info

These present each C<CI<nn>VAL>/C<COI<nn>VAL> field as an array whose element type
is the column's C<TYPE>, whose capacity is C<MAXROWS> (data) or C<NUMCOLS>
(optional columns), and whose current length is the column's C<NROWS>.

=head3 Record Processing

Routine C<process> implements the following algorithm:

=over

=item 1.

If device support or its C<read_table> routine is missing, set C<PACT> TRUE, log
an error and return, so processing is not retried (avoiding error storms).

=item 2.

Clear the C<CHGD> flag of every active data and optional column.

=item 3.

Call the device support C<<< read_table >>> routine to refresh the column data.
If it succeeds, clear C<UDF>.

=item 4.

Update the time stamp and reset alarms.

=item 5.

Post monitor events for the column data.

=item 6.

If a publisher has registered a notify hook in C<RPVT> (as the C<<< QSRV2 >>>
NTTable source does), call it synchronously while the record lock is held and
this cycle's C<CHGD> flags are still valid.

=item 7.

Scan the forward link, set C<PACT> FALSE and return.

=back

=head2 Device Support

=head3 Fields Of Interest To Device Support

Device support obtains a fresh table whenever C<read_table> is called, and is
chiefly interested in the column buffers and counts.

=fields PACT, DPVT, UDF, NUMCOLS, NUMOPTCOLS, MAXROWS

=head3 Device Support Interface

A table device support entry table (C<tabledset>) extends the standard DSET with
one routine:

  typedef struct {
      dset common;                              /* standard 5-entry DSET   */
      long (*read_table)(struct tableRecord *prec);
  } tabledset;

C<read_table> must refresh the active column buffers (and their C<NROWS>) and
return 0 on success. Device support that needs to allocate buffers or populate
column names/types does so from C<<< common.init_record >>>. Because reading
links is only safe after all records exist, support that must read links at init
returns C<<< TABLEREC_DEVINIT_PASS1 >>> from its pass-0 C<init_record> to ask the
record to call it again in pass 1.

=head3 Device Support For Soft Records

The C<<< Soft Channel >>> support (C<devTableSoft>) implements a table whose
columns are driven by their individual C<CI<nn>INP> / C<COI<nn>INP> links. At
initialization it loads any constant links into the column buffers; on each
C<read_table> it re-reads the non-constant links. C<STRING> columns are staged
through a temporary buffer and re-encoded into variable-length cells so that
numeric-to-string conversions cannot leave stale bytes in a cell.

=cut

    include "dbCommon.dbd"

    %
    %/* Device Support Entry Table */
    %struct tableRecord;
    %typedef struct {
    %    dset common;
    %    long (*read_table)(struct tableRecord *prec);
    %} tabledset;
    %#define HAS_tabledset
	%#define TABLEREC_DEVINIT_PASS1 2
    %#define TABLEREC_MAX_DATA_COLS 16
    %#define TABLEREC_MAX_OPT_COLS 16
    %

    field(INP,DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Input Specification")
        promptgroup("40 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(NUMCOLS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Number of active columns (set by device support)")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
    }
    field(MAXROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Max number of rows per column")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        initial("1")
    }
    field(RPVT, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Record Private")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        extra("void *rpvt")
        interest(4)
    }
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Column names — C00NAME .. C0FNAME
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(C00NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 00 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C01NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 01 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C02NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 02 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C03NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 03 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C04NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 04 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C05NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 05 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C06NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 06 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C07NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 07 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C08NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 08 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C09NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 09 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C0ANAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 0A name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C0BNAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 0B name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C0CNAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 0C name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C0DNAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 0D name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C0ENAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 0E name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C0FNAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Column 0F name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }

    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Column labels — C00LABEL .. C0FLABEL
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(C00LABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 00 label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C01LABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 01 label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C02LABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 02 label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C03LABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 03 label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C04LABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 04 label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C05LABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 05 label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C06LABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 06 label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C07LABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 07 label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C08LABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 08 label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C09LABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 09 label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C0ALABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 0A label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C0BLABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 0B label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C0CLABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 0C label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C0DLABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 0D label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C0ELABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 0E label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(C0FLABEL, DBF_STRING) {
        prompt("Column 0F label")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }

    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Column field types — C00TYPE .. C0FTYPE
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(C00TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 00 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C01TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 01 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C02TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 02 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C03TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 03 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C04TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 04 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C05TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 05 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C06TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 06 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C07TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 07 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C08TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 08 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C09TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 09 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C0ATYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 0A field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C0BTYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 0B field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C0CTYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 0C field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C0DTYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 0D field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C0ETYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 0E field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(C0FTYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Column 0F field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }

    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Column input links — C00INP .. C0FINP
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(C00INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 00 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C01INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 01 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C02INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 02 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C03INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 03 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C04INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 04 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C05INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 05 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C06INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 06 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C07INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 07 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C08INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 08 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C09INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 09 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C0AINP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 0A input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C0BINP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 0B input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C0CINP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 0C input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C0DINP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 0D input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C0EINP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 0E input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(C0FINP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Column 0F input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }

    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Column data buffers — C00VAL .. C0FVAL
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(C00VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 00 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c00val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C01VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 01 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c01val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C02VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 02 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c02val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C03VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 03 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c03val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C04VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 04 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c04val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C05VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 05 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c05val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C06VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 06 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c06val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C07VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 07 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c07val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C08VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 08 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c08val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C09VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 09 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c09val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0AVAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 0A data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c0aval")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0BVAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 0B data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c0bval")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0CVAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 0C data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c0cval")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0DVAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 0D data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c0dval")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0EVAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 0E data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c0eval")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0FVAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Column 0F data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *c0fval")
        interest(2)
    }

    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Column changed flags — C00CHGD .. C0FCHGD
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(C00CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 00 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C01CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 01 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C02CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 02 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C03CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 03 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C04CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 04 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C05CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 05 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C06CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 06 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C07CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 07 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C08CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 08 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C09CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 09 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0ACHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 0A changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0BCHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 0B changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0CCHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 0C changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0DCHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 0D changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0ECHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 0E changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0FCHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Column 0F changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }

    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Column valid row counts — C00NROWS .. C0FNROWS
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(C00NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 00 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C01NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 01 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C02NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 02 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C03NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 03 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C04NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 04 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C05NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 05 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C06NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 06 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C07NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 07 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C08NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 08 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C09NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 09 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0ANROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 0A number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0BNROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 0B number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0CNROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 0C number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0DNROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 0D number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0ENROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 0E number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(C0FNROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Column 0F number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }

    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Optional column names — CO00NAME .. CO0FNAME
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(CO00NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 00 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO01NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 01 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO02NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 02 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO03NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 03 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO04NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 04 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO05NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 05 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO06NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 06 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO07NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 07 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO08NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 08 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO09NAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 09 name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO0ANAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 0A name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO0BNAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 0B name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO0CNAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 0C name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO0DNAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 0D name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO0ENAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 0E name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }
    field(CO0FNAME, DBF_STRING) {
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        prompt("Optional column 0F name")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
        size(40)
    }

    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Optional column field types — CO00TYPE .. CO0FTYPE
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(CO00TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 00 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO01TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 01 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO02TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 02 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO03TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 03 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO04TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 04 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO05TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 05 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO06TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 06 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO07TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 07 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO08TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 08 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO09TYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 09 field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO0ATYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 0A field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO0BTYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 0B field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO0CTYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 0C field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO0DTYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 0D field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO0ETYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 0E field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }
    field(CO0FTYPE, DBF_MENU) {
        prompt("Optional column 0F field type")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
        menu(menuFtype)
        initial("DOUBLE")
    }

    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Optional column input links — CO00INP .. CO0FINP
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(CO00INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 00 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO01INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 01 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO02INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 02 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO03INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 03 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO04INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 04 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO05INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 05 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO06INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 06 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO07INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 07 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO08INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 08 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO09INP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 09 input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO0AINP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 0A input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO0BINP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 0B input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO0CINP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 0C input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO0DINP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 0D input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO0EINP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 0E input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }
    field(CO0FINP, DBF_INLINK) {
        prompt("Optional column 0F input link")
        promptgroup("41 - Input")
        interest(1)
    }

    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Optional column data buffers — CO00VAL .. CO0FVAL
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(CO00VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 00 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co00val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO01VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 01 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co01val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO02VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 02 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co02val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO03VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 03 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co03val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO04VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 04 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co04val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO05VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 05 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co05val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO06VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 06 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co06val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO07VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 07 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co07val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO08VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 08 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co08val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO09VAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 09 data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co09val")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0AVAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 0A data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co0aval")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0BVAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 0B data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co0bval")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0CVAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 0C data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co0cval")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0DVAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 0D data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co0dval")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0EVAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 0E data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co0eval")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0FVAL, DBF_NOACCESS) {
        prompt("Optional column 0F data")
        special(SPC_DBADDR)
        pp(TRUE)
        extra("void *co0fval")
        interest(2)
    }

    field(NUMOPTCOLS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Number of active optional columns (set by device support)")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(1)
    }

    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Optional column changed flags — CO00CHGD .. CO0FCHGD
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(CO00CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 00 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO01CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 01 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO02CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 02 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO03CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 03 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO04CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 04 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO05CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 05 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO06CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 06 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO07CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 07 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO08CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 08 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO09CHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 09 changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0ACHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 0A changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0BCHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 0B changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0CCHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 0C changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0DCHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 0D changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0ECHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 0E changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0FCHGD, DBF_UCHAR) {
        prompt("Optional column 0F changed flag")
        interest(2)
    }

    # ----------------------------------------------------------------
    # Optional column valid row counts — CO00NROWS .. CO0FNROWS
    # ----------------------------------------------------------------

    field(CO00NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 00 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO01NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 01 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO02NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 02 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO03NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 03 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO04NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 04 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO05NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 05 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO06NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 06 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO07NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 07 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO08NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 08 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO09NROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 09 number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0ANROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 0A number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0BNROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 0B number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0CNROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 0C number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0DNROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 0D number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0ENROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 0E number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
    field(CO0FNROWS, DBF_ULONG) {
        prompt("Optional column 0F number of valid rows")
        special(SPC_NOMOD)
        interest(2)
    }
}
